+++
title = "Eyeing the LASH"
date = 2001-01-12
[extra]
game = "LASH"
sort_game = "LASH"
author = "Paul O'Brian"
sort_author = "obrian paul"
reviewer = "James Mitchelhill"
sort_reviewer = "mitchelhill james"
+++
The word 'robot', as is known by many SF fans, is derived from the Czech word
'robota', meaning 'forced labor' and was first used in the play R.U.R. by the
playwright Capek. LASH, by Paul O'Brian concerns a robot named the MULE
(Multiple Use Land Explorer), and its involvement in a guided salvage
operation on the lands of a former cotton plantation in what once was Georgia.

Upon opening LASH, we're presented with the options to CONNECT or receive
HELP. This is one game where the HELP is essential reading. This is because the
HELP is not for the game itself, but for the robot that we are controlling. We
also get essential back-story in this section, everything you would expect if
you were in control of a remote salvage operation.

At this point, LASH looks like a superior treasure-hunt. Not a cave crawl, but
an after-apocalypse, burnt Earth crawl. That game might be interesting, but
it's not LASH. Or at least, not after the first half-hour or so. After that
point, LASH becomes a much more complex game, the IF Literature fans get even
more interested and those who wanted a new Adventure kick their computer in
dismay.

If LASH has a greatest flaw, then it is this initial misleading. This is also
its greatest strength, despite the possibly that the initial premise will be
enough to persuade literature-seekers that LASH is a puzzler.  Regardless, this
is a very literate game. Half SF, half Family Saga, and half fable; which makes
LASH a game and a half, which is accurate. There's a lot crammed into its z8
frame.

LASH's best quality, though, is the writing. O'Brian's descriptions are
evocative and suspenseful. Most impressive are the small details that the MULE
reports: Unsettling sounds in the distance; the strength of the wind, the
scratches on the wall; little hints at what has happened. The plantation the
robot visits is a place that has been, not one that is. The only criticism I
can make is that the background documents seem like they could have used a
little more work -- the tone seems slightly off. However, in the game proper,
the writing is among the best in interactive fiction.

Fortunately, the coding lives up to the writing's promise. Although the initial
public release had a few bugs -- unsurprising given the scope of the game -- I
could only find bugs by actively seeking them. Given the impressive record of
maintenance, I'm sure that any bugs reported will be fixed when the author has
time.

With its lack of any difficult puzzles, and the optional nature of most (I
played through it without a walkthrough, a rare experience for me), LASH is an
excellent introductory work, although not for children, due to the themes and
language the game is concerned with. The warning in the HELP section should be
taken seriously, even though it's fictional presentation could obscure its
real purpose.

Although LASH is not a game that will suit everybody, it does deserve to be
played. It is deep, and multiple play-throughs are rewarding. LASH can be an
extremely enjoyable and insightful experience. This is, quite simply, a
must-play game.

It also deserves a closer look. If you haven't played LASH yet, do so before
reading further: Spoilers will abound.

## SPOILERS

LASH is a very complex game. Structurally, it is divided into three sections,
the framing story surrounding the dream of slavery. It also deals with three
eras. The MULE is resident to the time after the second American civil war,
and directly experiences the time before the first American civil war. The
player also reads of the time before the second civil war via Dr. Lisa Percy's
diary. LASH also concerns itself with many themes -- slavery, war and race are
all readily apparent. Slavery is given primary attention, and this is perhaps
a mistake -- much criticism has been levelled at the game for its
simplification of the issue. "Slavery is bad," the game says, to which the
player replies "I know."

Hence, in this review, I won't focus on the slavery issue. What seems more
important in the game, is the treatment of people; no-one in the game is what
they seem.

Let me justify that statement: Master Nicholas is revealed as Linda's father
and (consequently) his son, Matthew, as Linda's half-brother. Momma, the wholly
domestic slave, is revealed to have connections to the underground railroad.
Luke, Linda's purported father, who attempted to murder Master Nicholas, was
doing so out of anger at the rape of Momma. Most interesting are the enforced
character changes. Linda must escape or be killed for the MULE to leave the
simulation. The Mule itself, is revealed to have the capability of sentience.
Every character -- potentially even the PC -- develops during LASH.

One consequence of this development, is that there's a lot going on, and the
player can easily miss all the subtlety occurring around them. Another problem
is that a player might never get all this information. Some of it relies on
asking the right questions of Matthew with a limited number of moves. Other
information is only received if Nicholas attempts to rape Linda -- she can die
before this point, or he can sell her down the river. Of course, the
incompleteness of information leads to a high replayability value, as do the
multiple endings available. This is a balance between story and game, and a
consequence of the medium of IF.

Also of interest is the race issue. As Linda is mixed-race, the MULE is part
machine, part human. Obvious comparisons can be drawn. Until we find out that
Nicholas is Linda's father we assume she is wholly black and, until the MULE
enters the simulation, we treat it as completely inhuman. The appearances of
both Linda and the MULE remain unchanged after we learn of their true natures.
This can be taken as commentary about how people are treated based on what we
can see, and although that's hardly a new idea, here we have an active and
deep relationship with the two oppressed protagonists. This is something that
could not have been achieved with static fiction. 

We also have Dr. Percy's journal, which tells us that the second civil war was
fought over racial issues. The journal itself is a clever tool to prevent the
player from entering the simulation without first having learned this. O'Brian
has made this information required reading before we go back to the days of
slavery. The player must know that everything that was fought for in those
days, by Matthew and his Harvard friends, was futile. Everyone dies anyway, a
few generations on.

As an aside, the journal is interesting in the way it reveals the Percys'
race. We're not informed that they are black until we're half-way through
Lisa's diary. I suspect that, up until this point, a lot of players (myself
included) had assumed that they were white. That doesn't make us racists
(although assuming that a criminal was black would), but it does give rise to
the question on a personal level -- if we make those assumptions, what other
assumptions do we make that we haven't yet realized?

Another facet of the game is how it explores the relationship between player
and protagonist. The MULE interface is used to justify the limited ways in
which an IF player can control the protagonist of a story. Various IF
conventions are incorporated into the game itself via careful design of the
MULE technology. Moreover, the story itself mimics classic IF -- the
treasure-hunt is the original text adventure plot. Even the nameless
adventurer is recreated here: You are the hero.

It's this link to the past that highlights how far IF has come since those
not-so-distant origins. LASH is evolved IF on equal footing with print
literature, able to stand amongst the written works of the world and not be
found wanting. As I said earlier, LASH is a must-play game. In the future, if
IF is studied in colleges then LASH is the kind of historically significant
work that I hope will be on thier required playing lists. Paul O'Brian has
taken IF a step forward towards those days.
