+++
title = "Puzzles vs. History"
date = 2001-05-18
[extra]
author = "Neil deMause"
sort_author = "deMause, Neil"
reviewer = "Adam Cadre"
sort_reviewer = "Cadre, Adam"
game = "Lost New York"
sort_game = "Lost New York"
+++
_Lost New York_ by Neil deMause sends the player character bouncing around in
time, from 1880 to 1905 to 1954 to 1780 to 2040.  But none of these dates has
anywhere near as much effect on the shape of the game as its year of
publication: 1996.

For in 1996, the conventional wisdom asserted that the remaining audience for
text adventures was after just that: text adventures. Games were essentially
just series of puzzles, with the story as a backdrop, the model world as set
decoration.  Yes, that backdrop and set decoration could be and often was
masterfully designed, but the idea that simply building a model world for the
player to poke around in or telling a story in which the player could
participate constituted valid IF only gained widespread acceptance over the
subsequent five years, as increasingly daring games placed less and less
emphasis on puzzles and were rewarded with plaudits from an audience that found
it rather liked that sort of thing.  But in 1996, how the audience might
respond was an open question.  Given the amount of effort that goes into a
full-length work of IF, most authors elected to go with the proven approach.
_Lost New York_ is no exception.  But while it follows the crowd, it does so with
obvious reluctance.

In the spirit of time travel, let's jump back about 400 years, to the time of
Shakespeare.  But not our Shakespeare -- this Shakespeare lives in an England
where theater audiences are mad about juggling acts.  Day after day, the Globe
is witness to trio after trio of balls, pins and torches being flung into the
air.  But the audiences didn't want to see _just_ juggling; they wanted the
juggling folded into a little story. Enter Shakespeare, who soars to fame on
the strength of "Romeo and Juliet", in which a pair of young people fall in
love at a masked ball(the chief entertainment there: juggling), but then the
boy's friend and the girl's cousin get into a ill-fated juggling contest and it
all goes downhill from there.  Now Shakespeare decides he might like to try
writing a history, perhaps something involving King Henry V... yes, a piece
tracing his evolution from carousing prince to the inspirational leader of his
countrymen in a great victory over the French.  But he can't just tell that
story -- where's the juggling?  If there's no juggling, it's not a real play!
So the first act ends up foregrounding a bunch of jugglers at the bar while
Falstaff and Prince Hal talk in the background, and proceeds to the point where
the jugglers accompanying the army are told that the English have won the
battle... and the audience response is tepid because while the historical stuff
is interesting, the juggling isn't as accomplished as that in in _Rito and
Imita_.  Shakespeare is left to mutter to himself about the constraints of the
medium.

Similarly, it's clear that in _Lost New York_ deMause's heart is in the
geographical and historical material.  Virtually all the prose is extremely
deft, but never is the writing more alive, more joyous, than when you die and
the author gets to tell you another wacky story about a long-dead mayor; never
are the quips funnier than when they're playing off the geography of the city
(try going east from the City Hall area in 1880, or north into Hell's Kitchen
later on.)  The fact that the game begins with a slideshow and ends with a
bibliography is another indication of where the author's interests lie.  Hint:
it's not in fiddling around with hairpins and stopwatches.

But because this was written in 1996, the author felt obliged to fill it with
juggl-- I mean, puzzles.  And these are mostly not very good, being chiefly of
the type where you're wandering around and find a fishing pole, which you take
because, well, it's implemented; later on you find a stream, and go fishing
because, well, that must be what the pole's for; you catch a fish and, when you
cut it open to cook it, a key falls out.  What was the key doing in the fish?
Well, one of the conventions of the genre at the time was that you weren't
supposed to ask questions like that.  That's not actually a puzzle from _Lost
New York_, but many similar ones abound.

Of course, while the "take everything that's not nailed down, look under and
behind and inside everything that is" ethic works fine in a dungeon, it gets to
be a little absurd when transplanted to the island of Manhattan.  In _Lost New York_,
Manhattan has like twelve things.  And that's too many.  (Bet you thought
I was going to go a different way with that, huh?)  Again, to avoid spoilers,
I'll disguise the details a bit.  Let's say that the Upper West Side, circa
1965, has been reduced to a single location with a mailbox in it.  Now, the
problem is _not_ that each street corner should be a separate location, nor
that every item in every store and every apartment should be implemented. As it
stands, the location works just fine as a representative area of the Upper West
Side, and the mailbox works just fine as a representative mailbox.  BUT!  As
soon as you fish around in the mailbox and pull out a live monkey (which you
then stuff into your knapsack) you are no longer dealing with the Platonic
Mailbox -- you're dealing with a specific, highly unusual mailbox.  And by
extension, this is no longer just a representative street corner: it's the
particular street corner with the strange monkey-containing mailbox.  And once
players lose the sense that the locations they're visiting are representative,
they're no longer wandering around Manhattan; they're navigating a diorama of
Manhattan with twelve things in it.

But it didn't have to be this way.  _Lost New York_ is as much about the New
Yorks that might have been as the ones that actually have, and in that spirit, I
can't help but muse about what might have happened had Neil deMause had his
notes stolen one day in 1995.  Disheartened, he puts off the project for a few
years, till his enthusiasm revives -- only now the IF landscape is different.
_A Mind Forever Voyaging_ is no longer a low-selling oddball; _lots_ of games now
revolve around exploration instead of dinking around with inventory.  And so
this alternate, post-'96 version of _Lost New York_ takes on a different shape.
Instead of players getting little more than a glimpse of New York's evolution,
whatever gets mentioned in passing as they're messing around with goats and
baseballs in curiously limited regions of the city, they can now roam the
entirety of the city freely, watching the different neighborhoods evolve.
Perhaps the interaction with figures who clearly fascinate the author -- Robert
Moses, Emma Goldman, the various mayors -- is more substantial... leading to
more New Yorks that might have been, perhaps?  A fully implemented Moses-free
New York, say, or one where Goldman's ideals took root... perhaps even a
modern-day New Amsterdam, if you diverge early enough.  And hey, TADS has
multimedia now: why not throw some pictures into the mix?... oh, and...

...and at this point I've got the blueprints for a 21st-century skyscraper and
am waving them at the base of the Empire State Building. The game has been
written, and if deMause is anything like me, the idea of revisiting a
project that was long ago declared done is hardly an appealing one...

...but hey, it's New York.  If it were ever really finished, we wouldn't have
that old story about the visitor from Nebraska.

