+++
title = "On Common Ground"
date = 2001-04-13
[extra]
reviewer = "Emily Short"
sort_reviewer = "Short, Emily"
author = "Stephen Granade"
sort_author = "Granade, Stephen"
game = "Common Ground"
sort_game = "Common Ground"
+++
Warning: the following is by necessity somewhat spoilery; though I 
have tried to avoid explicit information about the events of the 
game, reading it may affect your enjoyment if you haven't played it 
yet.

Stephen Granade's _Common Ground_ is a short, friendly game, more 
character-piece and story than puzzle.  By giving you the perspective 
of each of three protagonists in turn, it sketches in the 
relationships between members of a small family, showing you both 
sides of each point of conflict.

The technique of multiple viewpoints is a nifty one, used here with 
nuance and attention to detail.  Object descriptions change, and new 
ones pop in and out of view, depending on what the character might be 
expected to notice or understand.  The effect is subtler than the use 
of the same technique in _Exhibition_ and less broadly humorous than 
_Being Andrew Plotkin_: the characters are distinguished from each 
other by smaller variations, a separation of a few degrees only. 
Particularly fine is the way different people hear the *same* bits of 
conversation differently.  Wording, tone, and sometimes even factual 
content changes, depending on what is going on.

Likewise subtle is the handling of what you have to do in the game. 
Most of the activity is straightforward.  There is little that would 
count as a puzzle; there are a number of required actions (especially 
if you are one particular character), some of which are a bit boring, 
but this is exactly to the point.  They convey perfectly the 
irritation of the situation: leading a rather ordinary life full of 
small frustrations.

Ultimately, however, all this is in service of presenting a static 
situation, and the nuance of game detail is not quite matched by 
nuance of character depth.  By the end, you perceive how the 
characters misunderstand and undervalue each other, but they are 
still, in essence, rather stock characters: the rebellious teenage 
girl, the overworked mother, the slightly boozy stepfather.  One can 
sympathize with them to a degree, but they don't distinguish 
themselves with much particularity.  They lack pasts.  They lack 
hobbies, and external interests.  This sort of thing makes it 
difficult to care deeply about them.

Also problematic, and on similar terms, is the restriction of what 
one is allowed to say.  Interaction between characters uses the 
device of TALK TO, which has been used more and more in recent games, 
and to good effect in things like _Kaged_, I think.  But this is a 
game that rests upon its interaction between people, in which the 
relationships are the whole point; and it is a bit disappointing not 
to be able to try certain conversational approaches.

The implementation of the physical environment is likewise a bit 
under-immersive.  The house doesn't feel like a real house to me; it 
feels like a stage set up with a few key props for the drama.  What 
is there is precisely what must be there, and nothing more.

To all of these criticisms there are two perfectly reasonable 
objections.  One is that the nature of implementing this game -- one 
in which three different characters experience the same events -- 
severely restricts what one can do, since a PC cannot be forced to 
recapitulate the behavior of the NPC in an earlier scene.  The more 
immersive and fully interactive the game becomes, the more difficult 
it is to police player actions in a way that will keep the outcome 
consistent.

The second, less technical and more aesthetic, is that the characters 
are constrained by their nature.  They are bored, dissatisfied, and 
just managing to scrape through in life.  Their lack of deep 
dimension says something about how they perceive themselves. 
Likewise, being who they are, they will only say certain things.

The effect of all this is a bit like acting out a play -- a somewhat 
minimalist play, at that, one of those modern ones with no 
conceivable happy ending.  It presents the misery and disaffection of 
suburban life, and constrains the player character(s) in such a way 
that none of them really has a chance to rise above it.

And what of the ending?  There is an important decision to be made, 
and this is the one point at which you are not, in fact, constrained 
to one course of action.  You can choose which of two things to do -- 
but then you are never shown the outcome of the choice.  It is easy 
enough to imagine what might ensue from either one, but in the 
absence of any result at all, it's hard to feel the significance of 
the decision.  If you feel the power of the choice, it is entirely 
because you imagine it yourself -- sketching in implications and 
likely outcomes from your own personal experience, drawing on nothing 
in the game for support.

I'm not sure that it would have been wise to spell out, either in a 
detailed interactive piece or in a cut-scene, what happens the next 
day or the next week in lurid detail.  Such an addition might have 
overbalanced the game, taking attention from the delicacy of the 
chapters that are already there.  But it still does seem as though it 
would have been possible -- and would have much strengthened the game 
-- to make the decision itself more intense; to set up its emotional 
importance to the characters more; to give it, one way or the other, 
the force that it ought to have.

What we have, then, is a well-crafted and subtly considered piece 
that succeeds in many of its small goals, but possibly fails at the 
larger one of involving the player deeply.  The story it tells seems 
abridged and insufficient, and the characters never entirely free 
themselves from stereotype.  At the same time, it takes on a 
challenge rarely met in interactive fiction: it is entirely a story 
about nebulous human decisions and personal relationships, without 
wacky devices, melodramatic scenes, physical danger and pending 
disaster.
