+++
title = "Care For Another?"
date = 2001-02-23
[extra]
game = "Rematch"
sort_game = "Rematch"
reviewer = "Emily Short"
sort_reviewre = "Short, Emily"
author = "Andrew Pontious"
sort_author = "Pontious, Andrew"
+++
Andrew Pontious' _Rematch_ is the Aisle of puzzle games: a single move 
is your window of opportunity to avert a negative outcome, which 
means you will have to replay again and again.  147 times, in my case.

In some ways this is the ultimate timed puzzle, and I don't always 
like timed puzzles.  _Change in the Weather_, wonderful though it was 
in other respects, drove me just about nuts.  I survived the 
experience only with a walkthrough and laudanum.  Since _Rematch_ is 
just the one move, however, you don't have a long sequence to replay 
only to fail.  The structure also enforces careful puzzle design: one 
common complaint about bad puzzles is that they don't give enough 
feedback when you are close to, but have not yet arrived at, the 
solution.  In _Rematch_, everything you can do necessarily produces 
some outcome, often an instructive one.

_Rematch_ also accomplishes nicely a difficult task of IF recently 
discussed on rgif: encouraging the player to use non-standard verbs 
and syntax in order to accomplish game-specific goals.  There are a 
number of verbs in the game that fall outside the normal lexicon of 
IF games.  More to the point, however, Pontious has hacked the parser 
to accept much longer than normal input strings, with multiple 
indirect objects, for instance.  I wouldn't have attempted these 
except that game play seemed to demand it; after my first few 
successes in this direction I had greater and greater faith in the 
game's ability to understand the most outlandish sequences (and, in 
many cases, to have an interesting outcome for them.)

This combines with the game's other embedded hints to make for a 
forward-moving rather than stuck-and-frustrated play experience most 
of the time, and Pontious has also taken care to provide colorful or 
entertaining outcomes for verbs that aren't immediately relevant to 
the puzzle, so that experimentation is rewarded.  Helpful also is the 
auto-undo command, which undoes your actions each time you fail.

The one-turn format does also work against the puzzle, though -- or 
at least it did for me.  In order to reach a solution, you need to do 
a certain amount of exploration -- gathering information, but at the 
cost of losing over and over again.  This might have been less of an 
issue had the event-to-be-prevented been less horrific.  As it was I 
felt faintly guilty doing things that were not direct attempts at 
solution, and it wasn't until I was actually told to explore more 
that I had the gumption to ignore the outcome and do so 
systematically.

Approached with this systematic detachment, it's a successful if 
somewhat evil puzzle.  I was confused when it was going on, then 
gradually had more and more of a sense of what I wanted to do; at the 
end, however, it all clicked together with a satisfying snap, leaving 
no loose ends.

As writing or story I think it is slightly less successful.  Even 
excellent descriptions and dialogue begin to pall on the 129th 
reading, and much of the NPC conversation has a somewhat stiff and 
unconvincing quality.  There is a good reason for this, 
gameplay-wise, but it lends strength to the impression, especially on 
repeated playings, that these are clockwork people carrying out their 
clockwork functions in a world where you alone are sentient.

I mention this only because there is a story and characterization 
going on here: adumbrated in the opening words of the game is the 
relationship you have with the other characters, and the more you 
play the clearer the situation becomes.  It is significant not only 
from a puzzle point of view but also for the whole flavor of the 
game; but it never develops beyond a certain point, because the scope 
for development of complicated interrelationships is necessarily 
somewhat limited here.  Shallowly worked out, but thematically 
important.  My PC's frustration with the unstoppable cycle of Fate 
(the puzzle, the disaster, which play out over and over again) 
mingles with his frustration over the interpersonal situation.  This 
far, I think, it is effective.  On the other hand, the aforementioned 
need to distance myself from the urgency of the puzzle distracts me 
from viewing the characters as characters and encourages the attitude 
that they are merely cogs in a complex interlocking gear system.

Deeply moving narrative, then, it is not, partly because that is not 
its purpose (arguably) and partly because the puzzle goes to war with 
the story aspect and wins.  As a puzzle, though, it's an entertaining 
and rewarding one.
