+++
title = "Have Psychosis, Will Travel"
date = 2001-08-03
[extra]
game = "Time Bastard"
sort_game = "Time Bastard"
author = "Matt Fendahleen"
sort_author = "Fendahleen, Matt"
reviewer = "Sam Kabo Ashwell"
sort_reviewer = "Ashwell, Sam Kabo"
+++
*(bigtime spoilers)*

I'm often amazed at the quality of writing within the IF community, as
contrasted to the other internet-based writing communities. Perhaps it's
because the process of coding requires a certain amount of persistence; perhaps
the time required to code everything allows writers more time in which to
critically edit their prose; undoubtedly the betatesting process improves the
overall standard of writing. Unfortunately, none of these apply when the piece
in question happens to be a transcript. Maybe it's because the community's
insularity scares the dull elves off... but anyway, the review.

I read _Time Bastard_ last of all the walkthroughcomp entries, by chance as much
as anything. Having seen the other entries, I wasn't expecting wonders. The
first paragraph, therefore, blew me away: here, I realised, is some great
writing. Maybe it's because I'm at that stage in my mental development where a)
antiestablishment rants = the pinnacle of morality, b) revolting = funny, and
c) packed with references = sophistication but, nonetheless, I was surprised at
how little reaction to it there was. The reason is, most probably, the fact
that it's just a transcript.

The characterisation is excellent, with regard to both the protagonist and of
most of the other NPCs. In fact, it's far and away the strong point of the
piece.  Now, in a character, I like flaws. A character without flaws is dull,
boring, and devoid of personality. Vincent Dobbs, the eponymous _Time Bastard_,
appears to be entirely composed of character flaws. He considers dried human
skin as a writing material 'a neat effect', hurls his own phlegm to solve
puzzles, and hands his friends napalm on the pretext that it's Turkish Delight.
In short, he is a self-admitted criminally insane sociopath. Naturally, this
doesn't make him any the less endearing; the best comic characters are the evil
ones; Dobbs would be the best PC of the year if he had actually been coded.
(Given what he actually is, this is just a little ironic). To add to the
characterisation, everything is delivered in the irreverent style of the PC,
usually amused (alternating with bipolar rapidity between laconic and
exuberant) but occasionally bubbling over into chain-reaction rage, and
occasionally (heaven forbid!) even quasi-seriousness. Given the second-person
perspective of the vast majority of IF, the definition of the PC by his
description of his environment is a largely underused technique, especially to
the extent to which it is taken by _Time Bastard_; there is not a puzzle
(except, perhaps, in the final scene) that's resolved without, er... the phrase
'hilarity ensues' can actually be used with genuine meaning here. The humour,
however dark it gets, is light-hearted in the most inappropriate contexts (see
'those kyoot Chinese kids they got working down in the Hazardous Materials
refinery'); Vincent, in short, completely imposes himself upon the story at
every level.  And a good thing too.

As for the NPCs, I particularly loved Abdul. Much of the NPCs' actions reflect
as much on the protagonist as on themselves, and there are some excellent
touches here: for example, Abdul is reluctant to eat half of a 'undulating cube
of living unpleasantness' offered to him by Vincent, on the principle that it
might be something unpleasant again, but on realising that it's merely the
remnants of a tentacled experiment in occult eugenics, that only a second ago
was screeching at him from the ceiling, his response is "Ooo!  Calamari!"
Essentially, Abdul is just Vincent with a superiority complex and a reverence
of Cthulhu. He appears, unlike Dobbs, to know what he's doing (this is
undermined later on): this is pretty essential, since Abdul initiates most of
the plot developments (one feels Vincent, left to his own devices, would never
have done anything but hit people). Abdul's more remote bastardliness gives a
different comic perspective on the Time Bastard theme; his brand of insanity is
contrasted nicely with Vincent's, even when he's only demonstrating the finer
details of Tourette's in the background.

Given that the main strength of the piece lies in well-developed unpleasant
characters, it comes as a strong and ironic contrast that the, er, villain is
so completely tedious. Abdul and Vincent may be disgusting, but Purity is far
worse: she's bland (and intentionally so). Not only does she appear to be a
graduate from the So, Mr Bond College of Unbelievable Bad Guys, (tell your
enemies the intimate details of your evil masterplan, devise intricately
horrible fates for them, let them escape) but she has no taste at all:

{% gametext() %}
<p>Eww, they're all sappy Larry Elmore-eque paintings of dragons!  You can 
already feel your gorge beginning to rise.</p>
<p>Purity follows your gaze.  "I like dragons." she informs you coldly.<p>
<p>You must destroy this woman as soon as humanly possible.</p>
{% end %}

As a symbol of homogenised corporate culture and a clich&eacute;d authority
figure, she forms the ideal foil to Vincent; so much so that it's a little
unbelievable that the latter would be able to divert himself to puzzle-solving
in her presence instead of attempting grievous bodily harm. (The general
anti-authority theme is well developed and, though parodied by exaggeration as
often as anything else in the piece (see the It's Long Overdue rant) gives an
impression of being essentially heartfelt). Apart from her role as a bad-guy
parody, the humour fades and the tone becomes more serious as she becomes more
prominent; Dobbs' previously explosive anti-authoritarian tone becomes almost
subdued, which forms the dual role of allowing critical information to be
imparted to the reader in a vaguely serious tone, and of developing a great
deal of resentment: we want our interesting psycho back! What's this tedious
apricot woman doing dominating the narrative and making the prose all
pedestrian? Where's the mucus?

The basic plot, in Matt's own words, is Asshole Running Amok Through Time; this
theme seems to be both separate from and (initially) stronger than the frame
story and the plot; for a linear game, _Time Bastard_ initially seems almost
plotless. In fact, it seems to subvert all pretence of the game making sense to
the development of the Bastard through Time idea; since it's basically an
intriguing idea, it carries it off for long enough to keep the reader's
attention to the final scene (though whether it could carry this off as
walkthroughless IF is questionable; for example, in the penultimate Cromwell
scene, not the strongest of the piece, the interest wanes; _Time Bastard_ is
essentially a rapid series of very powerful hooks, and the Cromwell scene
doesn't have any).  Rather than using the walkthroughcomp restraints as a
starting point, the game feels as if the author took an idea and then hammered
it into shape around the walkthrough. This turns out to be more or less the
case; Matt says that the idea's about six years old.

The plot structure works well, although you don't notice this until you've
re-read it at least once, and it leaves most of the details for the reader to
work out. The final resolution puts into context all the miscellaneous
unexplained weirdness and seeming irrationality of earlier scenes, and to a
large extent justifies it; re-reading and explaining events in the light of the
ending is as much fun as reading it for the first time. In the light of the
ending, things which at first appeared to be simply jokes on the nature of
parser interaction, on the confines of the walkthroughcomp, and at the expense
of IF generally can be interpreted as plot hints, and things which initially
seemed completely pointless or irrational turn out to be jokes on the
walkthroughcomp confines. Since _Time Bastard_ doesn't go out of its way to explain its
every last detail, I found myself going through the piece with a fine-toothed
comb and working out retrospective rationalisations. (A good technique; if you
can get your readers cross-examining your writing, everything in that writing
grows in significance). It even, potentially, explains why hard-man psychopath
Dobbs is so intimately familiar with the details of geek subjects (IF, RPGs,
use of the phrase w00t).

For example, the sort of IF in which you don't know why you're trying to solve
a puzzle until you've solved it, and possibly a couple more puzzles down the
line. (I'm thinking of the Gold Boat puzzle in [Heroine's
Mantle](http://www.ifwiki.org/index.php/Heroine%27s_Mantle) here). Time Bastard
is very much that sort of IF, but constantly refers to the fact that this is
the case (see the unreservedly superb Treasure Frenzy! conversation; initially,
this appears to be solely genre satire (and there's plenty in here that was
probably intended only as genre parody) but this is rationalised by the ending.
The plot, which up until the ending (and second reading) strikes one as a weak
frame for a lot of injokes, character development and comp restraints, is
suddenly justified in its own right; this sleight of hand gives it perhaps more
apparent weight than it deserves in its own right. Another very nice technique,
and the appreciation of good technique always adds to the enjoyment of a piece.

If _Time Bastard_ had been a fully-coded game, I would have said it had a good
level of verbosity; since it's a transcript, this would have been easier to
achieve, and had it been actually interactive and without walkthrough, several
commands (especially towards the end) would have been all but impossible to
complete, but nonetheless: this is the density and quality of writing that
makes the difference between text-based adventure and interactive literature.
The same argument and qualifiers apply to the game's (?) length. Similarly,
it's been pointed out that it had something of an advantage over the other
transcript [walkthroughcomp](http://www.ifwiki.org/index.php/WalkthroughComp)
entrants in that it makes abundant use of non-essential commands which are, in
fact, essential to have any idea about what's going on, if not to actually
complete the game it represents. It's a reasonable point, but can't really
detract from _Time Bastard_'s value as a piece in its own right.

_Time Bastard_ is just a little bit injokey. If you don't follow
[rec.arts.int-fiction](https://groups.google.com/g/rec.arts.int-fiction) flame
wars, one scene in particular makes no sense at all, but is hilarious
otherwise. There are throwaway and considerably-less-than-throwaway references
to a host of other works of IF, which, are, as injokes tend to be, amusing if
you get 'em and confusing if you don't. Apart from that, it draws heavily
(again, with knowing amusement) on the Cthulhu genre and on The Matrix. (Except
that it takes steps the Matrix was too chicken to make; for example, the
protagonist is _part_ of nTopia rather than a human trapped in it, and the lead
villain is much more closely identified with corporate megalomania and
intrinsic human evil). And, yes, apparently that title is a corruption of the
Terry Gilliam vehicle Time Bandits. As heavily and frequently as _Time Bastard_
draws on genre and even clich&eacute;, it always does so, as with everything
else, in gleefully self-aware style; the Pretentious Nazi Occultist Literature
    section is perhaps the most obvious example.

_Time Bastard_ is well-written, acutely self-aware, and so funny that it made me laugh out
loud at least once; it's a demonstration of what a well-conceived comp can
achieve, an example of how very raw good ideas can be nailed down to some sort
of structure, and extremely enjoyable to read. In short, in my humble opinion,
this would be an excellent example of how IF should be done, if it were
actually IF. Curse.

Who's\_y0ur\_d4ddy, indeed. If this doesn't get turned into full-blown IF, Matt
had better be prepared to be woken up one morning by the Yith breaking down his
door.
