+++
title = "An Undiminished Chord"
date = 2001-02-09
[extra]
game = "Augmented Fourth"
sort_game = "Augmented Fourth"
author = "Brian Uri"
sort_author = "Uri, Brian"
reviewer = "Emily Short"
sort_reviewer = "Short, Emily"
+++
_Augmented Fourth_ is a fairly easy puzzle romp whose appeal lies in
wackily charming worldbuilding and sly jokes/reworkings of classic IF
and fantasy tropes. It's well-crafted and polished (going to show,
perhaps, that there's no reason an author's first-ever release can't
be competently assembled) and I encountered no bugs.  It did,
however, have some irritating patches, mostly related to the design
of the puzzles.

_Augmented Fourth_ uses an adapted-for-its-genre version of the
Enchanter spellcasting concept: as a trumpeter you can play pieces
whose magical power work transformations on your environment.  And
like the Enchanter spells, these pieces must be painstakingly
acquired and learned (though, fortunately, Uri has dispensed with the
irritating requirement that one learn them over and over again.  Once
you've learned a piece you know it; musicians are apparently less
absentminded than magicians, as a rule.)  This is a fun system in its
basic concept, and one reason it has been reused so many times over
the years, I imagine, is that it permits the author to put
considerable freedom into the hands of the player.

There are, of course, a couple of possible downsides.  One is the
combinatorial problem: you can trust that your players will try the
spell in just about every conceivable situation, not only in the one
or two places where it will solve a puzzle but in all the others,
including several where it ought to cause major trouble.  Uri does a
good job of providing interesting failure messages where the spells
are not going to work; he is also aided by the fact that the
music-spells are not directable, so instead of having to implement an
interaction (or failure) for every game object, he only has to deal
with every location.  This, I can only imagine, made things a lot
simpler.

The other downside is that the spells themselves do fairly odd and
abstract things.  This is delightful when it works; when it doesn't,
one is often left wondering what's missing and whether one is even
trying the right thing.  In one sequence of the game in particular I
was most of the way to the correct solution, but kept failing because
I hadn't set things up quite properly.  I had the idea; I just didn't
have the execution exactly as Uri envisioned it, and there were no
"you're almost right" messages to help me along, so I was left to
wonder whether I had the right spell at all.  Making this even more
frustrating is that the spells fail randomly, especially during the
early section of the game; you can easily 'misplay' a piece, not
because it's not the right piece for the moment but because the
random number generator is not on your side.  This, boys and girls,
is frustrating.  I suppose the idea is to convey the feeling of
accomplishment as the game goes on and you become a more proficient
musician, able to play correctly the first time, but it also makes
the early puzzles a pain.

So much for that: there were a couple of spots where I was held up by
what I felt was an arbitrary lack of hintage, and insufficient
indication when I was close.  There were also red herrings (besides
the obvious one), some of them (to me at least) moderately confusing.
On the whole, however, I didn't find this to be too severe a problem.
The author provides an elegantly implemented walkthrough too,
available from gmd, htmlized so that you can highlight only the parts
you want to see.  This is nice.

This game also pointed up some spots in which my expectations have
changed since early text adventure games.  _Augmented Fourth_ does some
things the Old Skool way.  The need to do arbitrary things just
because they seem like they might be a good idea.  The freedom to
mistreat NPCs, which, these days, makes me feel a little guilty.  The
linearity of the game design, a lot of which consists of getting into
one place which contains a key to another place where there's a key
to a third place...  Then, too, I nearly ran screaming when I
encountered the, ah, maze.  Not to worry, though: it's not as bad as
it looks.

And it all ends well: the endgame is satisfying and not too
difficult, which is How It Should Be.

There are moments of surrealism in the game, and plays on the names
of things reminiscent of the un-un-machine, the T-remover, and other
such mechanisms of text-only adventures.  There is much talk these
days of simulationist IF, of achieving "immersion" by getting the
player to identify as strongly as possible with the PC; _Augmented
Fourth_ pursues a different direction, never trying to pull the player
in but keeping much of the amusement value of the game precisely at
that interface between player and player character.  I think I
derived as much amusement from the score notification system as I did
from some of the puzzles.  At the same time, there is a consistent
story providing context for all this -- which the player also
receives in an unimmersive way, by receiving flashes of what is
happening "meanwhile" in another part of the kingdom.  The result is
stylish and entertaining, even if not emotionally compelling
particularly; I never felt suspense or was particularly concerned
about the jeopardy of my PC, for instance.  But that was, in this
case, fine.

Where _Augmented Fourth_ shines most is in the goofy style, which, with
its numerous animals and brightly colored objects, frequently
reminded me of a children's book.  Combined with the relative
easiness and the elegant implementation (which deals nicely with book
objects and other tricky items), this makes it a pleasant way to
spend a few hours.
