+++
title = "Archaeology"
date = 2001-06-29
[extra]
author = "Infocom"
sort_author = "Infocom"
game = "Dungeon"
sort_game = "Dungeon"
reviewer = "Paul O'Brian"
sort_reviewer = "O'Brian, Paul"
+++
Zork I was the first text adventure game I ever played, and I played it a lot.
That game occupied many, many hours of my time and, to this day, it remains one
of only a few Infocom games I was ever able to solve without hints, due solely
to my stubborn and relentless attention to it.  Between those marathon
childhood sessions and the occasions on which I've replayed it since, I have
walked those underground caverns many times, and their geography is so fixed in
my mind that I think if I should ever find myself transported there, I could
navigate with ease.  Or, at least, that's how I _used_ to feel, before I
started playing Dungeon and got my internal map thoroughly whacked.

Dungeon is the predecessor to the Zork games; it was MIT's answer to Crowther
and Woods' "Adventure" and, much like that game, it lived on a mainframe, since
its prodigious size was too great for the personal computers of its day. When
the authors decided to make a commercial go of the text adventure business,
they chopped Dungeon into three sections, rearranging the geography and adding
some new elements to each chapter, especially the second and third. I've played
the Zork games many times, but I had always wanted to play the mainframe
version in order to better understand just what was added and what subtracted.
So when I opened the WinGlk version of Andrew Plotkin's C translation of the
game, I was prepared for some shifts in layout compared to my deeply-graven
memories of Zork I.

What I wasn't prepared for, though, was the way in which Dungeon gleefully
confounds any sense of actual geography in exchange for making the game map
another obstacle to be overcome. In Dungeon, connections that line up properly
(for example, leaving one room to the south and entering the adjoining room
from the north) are the exception rather than the rule. Instead, you may go
west and find that to get back to where you came from, you have to go west
_again_. In a recent article about [crafting a good setting for fantasy IF](http://www.brasslantern.org/writers/iftheory/setting.html),
Emily Short addressed this tendency:

<blockquote>
[In] the ideal IF setting, the parts of the setting relate to each other in
comprehensible ways. Things are located sensibly. I dislike mazes not only
because you do have to map them but also because they interfere with and
scramble up the intuitive sense of place that I otherwise build up as I play. 
</blockquote>

In this sense, almost the entirety of Dungeon functions as a maze, and any
coherent sense of place that might emerge is bound to get smacked down as soon
as the next exit is explored. I have a pretty good knack for mapping in my
head, and thus don't tend to make a map while playing IF but, with this game,
there was no way I could pursue that strategy.  Thus, grumbling, I hauled out
my copy of GUEmap and tried diligently to record the tortured web of
interconnections that make up the Dungeon landscape. When I finally finished, I
[uploaded the results to
GMD](https://www.ifarchive.org/if-archive/solutions/maps/Dungeon.zip) so that
other players like myself won't have to struggle through the game's mazes on
their own.

And oh, the mazes &mdash; in addition to the general illogic of its structure,
Dungeon also sports several mazes, all of which carry the "warped connections"
tendency to its furthest extreme. Of course, when seen from the historical
perspective, these mazes make sense: Adventure had mazes, and since mazes are
one of the easiest kinds of puzzles to create, it follows that the game
attempting to top Adventure would have mazes of its own. What Dungeon does,
though, is to twist the knife: not only does it present the player with mazes,
it confounds the typical "drop item and map" strategy by having an NPC come
along and remove or rearrange those items, taunting the player with comments
like "My, I wonder who left this fine hot pepper sandwich here?"

When viewed with a modern eye, obstacles like this make clear how different is
the stance of modern IF from its ancestors. Dungeon set itself up unambiguously
as the player's antagonist, and it wasn't particularly concerned with telling a
story, nor even with describing a world. Plot is nonexistent, and fabulous
treasures are described with perfunctory lines like "You see nothing special
about the sapphire bracelet." Instead, Dungeon puts its energies into confusing
and confounding the player, and wacky map connections are but the tip of the
iceberg. Along with the aforementioned mazes, there's the light source, which
always runs out at the worst possible times. There's the Round Room, guaranteed
to tangle any map. There are the "secret word" puzzles, some of which still
perplex me to this day, even though I know how they operate. And of course,
there's the thief, whose annoyances are both numerous and legendary. Dungeon
wants nothing more than to see you fail, and it's not overly concerned with how
much fun you might be having. As Robb Sherwin asserted on rec.games.int-fiction
recently, "[Zork hates its player](http://groups.google.com/groups?ic=1&selm=3b1d33a9.613499395%40voder)."

Today's IF, by contrast, works a bit harder to collaborate with the player,
with the aim of creating a shared experience, both in setting and plot. Even
the Zork games moved in this direction, at least in comparison to Dungeon,
mitigating some of the latter game's greatest excesses by straightening out
many map connections, allowing more flexibility with the permanent light
source, and providing a bit more description from time to time. The ways in
which Infocom itself engineered the shift from "text-based puzzle games" to
actual interactive fiction is a subject for another article, but what's become
clear is that where the emphasis was once on opposition, it has shifted
steadily to cooperation.

To my mind, this shift is both appropriate and necessary, and what playing
Dungeon illuminated for me is that this movement towards collaborative IF is
not the same thing as the concurrent movement towards "literary IF", though
they are often confused for one another. I can envision a game that, like
Dungeon, has no particular literary pretensions, but unlike Dungeon, isn't
trying to undermine its player through the use of arbitrary techniques like
twisty map connections and unreliable light sources. I would assert that
collaborative IF doesn't need to tell a story, and it certainly doesn't need to
aspire to literary greatness, but it does need to work with the player to
create a rich, interactive world, and it does need to be concerned with giving
the player a positive, fun experience. Of course collaborative IF can be
puzzleless, but it needn't be &mdash; puzzles can be part of the fun, as long
as they aren't geared towards forcing restarts after 800 moves, or making the
player do tedious, menial work. The move away from antagonistic IF is the
reason why things like mazes, limited light sources, and starvation puzzles are
met with a chorus of jeers these days, but the elimination of these elements
doesn't necessarily dictate anything in particular about how literary or
puzzleless a game might be.  Instead, the change makes the whole experience of
IF more about fun than bloody-minded perseverance; playing Dungeon makes it
clear how necessary this change was, and how far we've come since those
mainframe days.
